# Data Lakes

## Project Overview
A music streaming startup, Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database even more and want to move their data warehouse to a data lake. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.
As their data engineer, you are tasked with building an ETL pipeline that extracts their data from S3, processes them using Spark, and loads the data back into S3 as a set of dimensional tables. This will allow their analytics team to continue finding insights in what songs their users are listening to.
You'll be able to test your database and ETL pipeline by running queries given to you by the analytics team from Sparkify and compare your results with their expected results.

## Project Description
In this project, you'll apply what you've learned on Spark and data lakes to build an ETL pipeline for a data lake hosted on S3. To complete the project, you will need to load data from S3, process the data into analytics tables using Spark, and load them back into S3. You'll deploy this Spark process on a cluster using AWS.


## Datasets
You'll be working with two datasets that reside in S3. Here are the S3 links for each:
- Song data: s3://udacity-dend/song_data
- Log data: s3://udacity-dend/log_data

The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.
```
song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json
```

The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings.
The log files in the dataset you'll be working with are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.
```
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json
```

## Schema
### Fact Table
**songplays** - Records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page `NextSong`
- start_time TIMESTAMP,
- user_id INTEGER,
- level TEXT,
- song_id TEXT,
- artist_id TEXT,
- session_id INTEGER,
- location TEXT INTEGER,
- user_agent TEXT INTEGER

### Dimension Tables
**user**  - users in the app
- user_id INTEGER,
- first_name TEXT, 
- last_name TEXT,
- gender TEXT,
- level TEXT

**song**  - songs in music database
- song_id TEXT, 
- title TEXT, 
- artist_id TEXT, 
- year INTEGER, 
- duration FLOAT

**artist**  - artists in music database
- artist_id TEXT, 
- name TEXT, 
- location TEXT, 
- latitude FLOAT, 
- longitude FLOAT

**time**  - timestamps of records in  **songplays**  broken down into specific units
- start_time TIMESTAMP, 
- hour INTEGER, 
- day INTEGER, 
- week INTEGER, 
- month INTEGER, 
- year INTEGER, 
- weekday INTEGER

## How to Run
You will need an EMR cluster to run the project. You will also need an `S3` bucket and an IAM user with Write access to this `S3` bucket. You follow the steps below to run this script on EMR cluster.
- Create an EMR cluster in `us-west-2` region.
- Clone this repository on EMR cluster's master node.
- Fill in secret and access keys for IAM user in `dl.cfg`.
- Update the `OUTPUT_PATH` to point to your S3 bucket.
- Run `spark-submit etl.py` to start the ETL process.

## Description of Project Files
`dl.cfg` contains the project configs<br />
`etl.py` reads songs and logs data from S3 and creates 5 new tables as per the schema described above.<br />
`README.md` contains discussion about the project.



